As I was saying that Guy Warren, the president of
Chamber of Commerce, had the good sense to appoint
Mr. Lon C. Hill, who was president of the power
company, Central Power and Light Company. And his
company took the position that Corpus Christi is
the prime city of their system. and was destined to
go places and expand and be a big city and be a big
market for their power, they gave him an unlimited
expense account that he could use in connection
with working with the Area Development
Committee. And he used it very effectively. He
would have luncheons for these various
committees particularly the subcommittee, the
working committee. He would get them together and
tell them this is what we want to do and how to do it.
And he did it in a very good-natured way, but very
firm. I recall one time he took us in the CPNL
boardroom. We had a serious problem to settle
between the city and the county and the navigation
district. And he says, I want you three fellas or
you three agencies to get in this room and start
talking. And as he went out, he says, now, I'm going
to lock the door. And when you come to an answer,
I'll unlock the door and let you in or let you out.
Well, it was good natured he wouldn't do it. But
after we got through, he took us out to dinner, and
we solved the problem. But that's the kind of an
atmosphere we had to work with. And it was very
effective.
Well, when this report was published, the Area
Development Committee, the Comprehensive Plan,
it was called, for Corpus Christi area, the Area
Development Committee, at their expense, had a
big banquet. They filled the biggest hotel room
that they had and invited all of the citizens
committees and all the leaders, the Area
Development Committee, and their wives. And it
was the Driscoll Hotel at that time. And they had a
very large ballroom. We never had one as big as that
since. But they filled it. And the purpose was to
present the community with the plan.
So after the dinner, they got up. And they had
Bartholomew explain the plan briefly. And then
they called on each of the political leaders and
said, now, you've been a part of this plan. You
worked along with it. And it's going to be you
that's going to carry it out, not the Area
Development Committee. We're citizens. We've
been willing to put up most of the money. The city
and the county and the navigation district each
put up $10,000. But otherwise, it was all
citizens' money.
So they called on each one of them to talk. Each one
of them got up and said, now, we'll do our part. They
even had a representative of the city the federal
government there, congressmen, and the state
representative. And I remember very well when
they came around to the city, the mayor had been a
member of this committee. I knew what was coming.
So prior to this meeting, he had gotten past the
largest bond issue that the city had ever
passed. And it was all based on this plan. And he
said, if it isn't in the plan, I don't want it in the
bond issue. So when he got up and he said, well,
here's our contribution. We've got so many
million dollars already voted to carry out our
part of the plan.
And the other political leaders said the same
thing. Now, this is quite a long ways to come from
the time that we had this commission form of
government. And there was political backbiting.
And nobody wanted to do anything. And nobody would
vote bonds. So based on the plan, they got the bond
issue passed. And
they went right to work on it. We built a dam right
away, new water supply. We got busy on the bridge.
It took a little while longer to get the airport
problem worked out because it was a conflict with
the military airspace. And we had to wait till that
got cleared up. The State Highway Department went
to work on a plan for a freeway system. And
local citizens agreed to do their share in buying
the right of way, in addition to what they had in
this.
The plan did have parallel streets, but these were
modified. the State Highway Department offered
the freeways. But it was all fit in with the plan.
From time to time, there were minor
modifications. But basically, the plan went on
up. They did everything in the plan. And once we got
started on implementing this plan, the citizens
were impatient. They wanted it. They didn't want
it on the 15 or 20 year schedule that we had. They
wanted it faster than that. So we condensed it and
still were able to finance it. And I
had something else on that. On the freeways? Yeah,
well,
we implemented all parts of the plan
very much as they were proposed. One example, in
the school plan, the schools were generally
located by using the system of circles. And the
school administration were so anxious to have the
schools located in the right place that they went
out and bought the land that was at the center of the
circle. And in a few instances, they were so
conscientious about trying to put it in the right
place that they bought land that was maybe not as
suitable as maybe a block away would have been. It
wasn't properly drained or something. But this
was an attitude of their conscientiousness to do
it according to the plan. As
faithfully as possible. As faithfully as
possible. And they did. And the one thing that was
not implemented was urban renewal. This city was
free enterprise. And there was a group, including
some of the members of the Area Development
Committee, that felt that this was socialistic
and that they wouldn't subscribe to it. And they
got a law passed in the legislature requiring a
referendum
for urban renewal to be undertaken. They had a
referendum. And it failed four to one. So the only
thing that was not implemented in the plan was the
urban renewal.
It was tried again two other times, and it failed
each time. So this city was not oriented to urban
renewal.
I think it's appropriate to go back now and talk a
little bit about our harbor and ship channel. As
you know, the Gulf Coast here is subject to
hurricanes. In 1919, we had a very serious
hurricane here that virtually
wiped off the development on an area north of the
bridge called North Beach. A great many lives were
lost.
the city decided that they needed some
protection. At the same time we were talking about
building a harbor here, we had a ship channel that
was a shallow channel that served the piers out in
front of the town. But these were shallow draft
vessels and
were not adequate. The citizens here
went to Congress and got this city designated for a
deep harbor, a deep draft harbor. Congress passed
it and then voted the funds to dig a deeper channel
and to dig a deep harbor. This was completed in
1926. at which time the Bascule Bridge was built.
The harbor was much smaller than it is today. But in
order to get this harbor, the community and the
state had to provide a seawall protection in front
of the city.
The local citizens went to the legislature and got
an act passed that was called tax remission. And it
was for seven counties around here that all the
state taxes would be remitted to a fund called the
Seawall Protection Fund for Corpus Christi. At
that time, the development around here was some
farmland. But a lot of it was brush, and it was just
coming into farmland, good productive farmland.
And the taxes weren't very high. So this act didn't
yield an awful lot of money. But it did yield enough
that we could put a breakwater out in front of the
city. And that is the breakwater that's out there
now, those rocks. This satisfied the
federal government of protection of the harbor.
But as long about this time, I mentioned that we had
discovered oil in this area and that the farmland
is expanding rapidly. And we were producing a
great deal of cotton, which was being shipped out
of the new harbor And the taxes for this
seven-county area increased substantially. So
it was quite a bit of funds there available. The
community then decided that they wanted a seawall
in front of the city, and that
Gutzon Borglum was a resident of Beeville. He made
a plaster model for the seawall here and even
offered to build a statue of Christ and give it to
the city if they'd follow his model. For some
reason, they didn't go along with that. But later
on, they sent committees all over the United
States looking at seawalls. They came back and
decided what kind of a seawall they wanted. And
they engaged a firm of engineers, and they went
ahead and designed a seawall.
And
what they did with this seawall was to place it out
into the bay, about a block or two blocks out into
the bay. And then they filled the land behind the
seawall with dredged material and created land.
Some of this land went to the owners of the adjacent
property for riparian rights, but about one block
of it was left for public use. And this is what made
the beautiful bayfront. The seawall was built and
completed in 1941.
just before World War II. Who did the work on it? Who
did all the construction? Well, there was a local
construction firm. It might have been Brown and
Root. I'm not sure. Anyhow, the Meyers and Noyes
were the engineers. It wasn't done then with the
WPA labor? No. No, it was all contract. Because
there's a rumor that that was done with WPA. No,
there was no WPA. It was all done with bond money.
No, all done with money from this fund. The special
fund. They issued bonds on it, but they paid off
these bonds from the revenue from this tax
remission. And that was... finally paid off in
about 1950, and the remission act was then
repealed. We probably should mention that
Goodson Borglum then went on to be the sculptor at
Mount Rushmore. Yeah, yeah. I understand that the
statue of Christ that was destined for, was
offered to Corpus Christi went to Spearfish,
South Dakota. South Dakota. Of course, Goodson
Borglum all the time was working on Mount
Rushmore.
During that same period. During the same period.
Now, after the war,
this land between the, out in front of the, between
the sea wall old shoreline that was owned by the
public was undeveloped. It had a lot of shell and
sand and wasn't very attractive and had no
planning. So the city then,
with the encouragement of the Chamber of
Commerce, employed the landscape firm and city
planning firm of Hare and Hare out of Kansas City to
design the
seawall, the landscaping on the seawall and the
piers that were part of the seawall, the T-heads we
call them. So the landscaping that is there is the
result of the design that was made by the very
famous landscape architectural firm of Hare and
Hare.
Since
going back to the ship channel, the ship channel
was extended several times. In about 1955,
it was extended several miles.
In connection with the Bascule Bridge Removal
Project, the head of navigation in the ship
channel, or the harbor, was extended about four
miles up the
channel. And the railroad bridge was built up at
the upper part of the channel.
As
part of the land use plan, it
was conceived that the industry all ought to be on
the north side of the city near the ship channel.
Two reasons. One, the prevailing wind was from the
southeast, and it blew the industrial odors away
from the city if it was over there. Also that we
wanted the Bayfront to be kept clean and most of it
in public ownership for use of recreation and the
beauty of the Bayfront. This is all part of the land
use plan that was included in the area development
plan. And the city has adhered to it remarkably
well.
One of the problems that Corpus Christi had was
drainage. Fortunately, most of the city is 14 feet
or above except for the downtown area and on Corpus
Christi Beach. But strangely enough, the slope of
the land above was away from the bay so that in order
to drain the land on which the city was to be built,
it was necessary to dig channels that would go
through the bluff and into the bay.
Four or five large channels were built,
Louisiana, Carmel Parkway, and a couple of
others. Now these were wide and originally were
open ditches, but as the city developed, the
ditches were not acceptable. And large boxes,
concrete boxes, were placed in these ditches to
carry off the water. And all the feeder drainage
was funneled into these big channels and big boxes
and shunted into the bay. In some cases, they were
several hundred feet wide. They were covered and
landscaped and made recreation areas. So as a
result, you'll find several areas in the city that
have wide open spaces
running towards the bay. It gives an openness to
the area. developed part of the city. Has that
system worked well? It has worked perfectly. How
about during hurricanes? We have no problems
during hurricanes. We're above the high point.
The only problem that we've had was in the downtown
area. After the seawall was built, the seawall was
higher than the main business district. So as part
of the seawall construction, a large drainage box
sewer, storm sewer, was placed in Water Street.
And all of the water that falls in this area goes
into this big drainage box. And at either end, one
on the north end and one on the south end, There are
large pumps, a series of large pumps, that will
pump this water out even though the water in the bay
is higher than the
land in the downtown district. The pumps are
strong enough to pump against the hydraulic head
of the bay. And we've never had any serious
problem.
One time, one of the pumps got stuck and wouldn't
pump water out. And enough rainfall came in that
the water got up to the door sills.
The council was very much perturbed and made sure
that the pumps were in good working order. They
start those pumps and run them every few days to
make sure that they have proper operating for them
all year round.
Well, you take that railroad line that goes out of
San Antonio, goes to Del Rio. Now, every so often
along there, they had a little town where they had a
water plant. They had a water tank. When they got to
Uvalde, they laid it out, 300-foot square blocks
centered around the railroad station, laid out by
the railroad engineers. But it was the city. You
take DeHannis. And a whole bunch of those little
cities all along there, they were all laid out the
same way. And they're there now. Well, this is
analogous to the Illinois experience of the
Illinois Central Railroad, laying out all the
towns. Sure. Sure they did. Well, we got that. Now,
we got that up in West Texas, too. A lot of those
cities out there were laid out by the railroads.
But those were engineers, not planners. Yeah, but
they didn't have planners then. No. They were the
planners. Whatever it is, they were responsible
for shaping our city, our towns. Well, then, after
that initial era was over, then a lot of planning
was done for the small cities of Texas with
consultants and Well, the 701s, you mean. Later
the 701s. But nothing was done before the 701s?
Very little.
Hare and Hare did something in Wichita Falls. Yes.
There
was something done in Austin.
Well, George Kresser did a lot of work up there in
Fort Worth, some in Dallas, laying out the parkway
system. I don't know what he did in El Paso. I'm not
familiar with that. He did a general plan in 1925.
Well, Bartholomew did something there, too, one
time.
Another element
in the development of our cities
speculative developers. There were a whole lot of
them. They would, over here at Rockport and that
area, they laid out miles and miles of area with
streets. What they would do, they would lay out the
town with lots in the town, and then they'd bring
people down here by train. snowbirds. They would
put them in the train and then run them by and show
them it. And they actually brought in fruit trees
and tied on grapefruit. And so that when they went
by, they said, see, look at the grapefruit. But it
was tremendous promotion like that. And what they
would do And it created a great many problems. And I
know because I've done some work up in Rockport.
They would sell a lot in town to one of these people
they'd bring down here on the train. And then
they'd give them, I think it was a five-acre tract
out on the edge of town in the brush. So they sold
these things all over the world. And so when you
want to develop any area around there, you've got
all the title problems of these people that own
these little five-acre tracts. And they're out of
town. It sounds like the Florida boom did it. You
can't assemble a tract of land large enough to
really do any good with.
Summing up. The
first comprehensive plan, it is rather
remarkable that a city that had been mainly a
tourist center or a resort center was just coming
into an industrial
city
building of the ship channel and the discovery of
oil, that the leaders of the community could get
together and
establish a city manager form of government, and
in so doing, provided the necessary charter
provisions for the establishment of an official
planning commission. And in addition to that, the
leaders, the economic leaders, the political
leaders, and a great many of the citizens were able
to come together and unite in
preparing a comprehensive plan for the city.
The plan was technically very well done, but in
addition, the plan provided for the means of
financing it And...